200 секунд
Hello, I'm Andrey Sazykin, this is the course of the computer network.
The topic of the lecture is the protocol HTTP.
We are starting to consider the protocol of the application level, the stack of the protocols
TCP/IP and we will start with the protocol HTTP.
HTTP is encrypted as a hypertext transfer protocol, the protocol of the hypertext transfer
of the hypertext and the protocol HTTP is the basis of the web.
In general, the concept of the web was proposed by Tim Berners-Lee from CERN, long enough
in 1989.
Tim Berners-Lee proposed four things.
The first is the language of the hypertext markup page HTML, the hypertext markup language
protocol, the transfer of such hypertext pages of the HTTP.
This protocol we will now consider.
The web server, the server on which the pages are placed in the format of HTML and the
text web browser, which can be connected to different web servers and show pages
from different web servers.
In the Tim Berners-Lee version, the browser showed only text.
It is clear that now web browsers allow you to show images, video, music and many
other types of resources.
What is hypertext?
This is a text in which the markup is included and the markup tells how to show or how to
process the text or the other fragment.
In the web, the markup is used.
HTML, the hypertext markup language is indicated by the so-called tags.
Tags can indicate formatting.
For example, the HTTP protocol is the header.
Tag H1, tag UL and LI allow you to show a list.
Also, tags allow you to insert in the so-called hyper-sales page.
On the hyper-sale page, you can switch from one web page to another.
And the name is a light connection page and provided such popularity
to the web.
This is how the web page looks when it is shown
browser.
The HTTP protocol header is a list.
An important role in the web is the URL.
Uniform resource locator or unify the location of the resource.
It is the URL where the page is located.
It is the URL that is inserted into the hyper-sales page and allows you to connect one page
with another.
The URL consists of several parts.
Now we will consider three main parts.
The first is the protocol.
Here is the HTTP protocol.
The second is the address of the server, on which the page is located.
Here you can find the domain name.
For example, the address of my website can also be used as an IP address.
And the third part is the address of the page that we want to load
from the server.
In addition to the HTTP protocol, other protocols can be used.
For example, the HTTP protocol, the FTP protocol and a lot of others.
Also, not necessarily in the URL and in the HTTP, only HTML can be used
in the page.
You can use the URL, for example, for text files, pictures,
video files and other types of files.
There are several versions of the HTTP protocol.
The first version is 0.9, an experimental version that was used only
inside CERN.
It was created in 1991.
The official version of HTTP/1 was released in 1996.
And almost immediately in 1997, the expansion of this version
of HTTP/1.1 was released.
In this version, compared to the first version, HTTP was added
to cache, work with constant connection and authentication.
But this version is used most often now.
Although now there are two more modern versions.
The updated version of the HTTP protocol, HTTP/2, was released in 2015.
It provided an increase in productivity and security.
The modern version of HTTP is HTTP/3.
It was released in 2022 and is now gradually being used.
HTTP protocol works in the request-answer mode.
The client, as a rule, sends a request to the server in the browser,
as a rule, sends a request to any page.
And the server sends an answer that contains exactly that page
that the browser asked for.
On the transport level, HTTP protocol uses TCP protocol.
This means that for HTTP, a reliable delivery of data is guaranteed.
And web servers, as a rule, use port 80 TCP.
HTTP/1.1 protocol and more early versions use the text mode
HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, a more complex binary mode.
In this video, we will look at how HTTP works.
The first version is version 1.1.
How HTTP/2 and 3 works, we will look more closely
further in the course.
The text mode means that the browser and the server
send each other the most common lines.
The request of HTTP consists of three parts.
The first part is the request, the second part is the header,
and the third part is the body of communication.
The header and the body of communication are not necessary.
The request consists of three parts.
The first part is the so-called HTTP method.
Here is the method get get resource.
After the method is indicated what is the name of the resource
we want to get.
Here we want to get the page /courses.
And the third part of the request is the useable version
of the HTTP protocol.
Here we use the HTTP version 1.1.
After the request is sent, you can specify the header.
But they are not necessary.
The only exception is the header.
The header is the required HTTP version 1.1.
The header contains the domain name of the web server
to which we connect.
Why is it done?
The fact is that modern servers on the same IP
address can serve several web servers with different
domain names.
And in order to determine what is the domain name
sent to the request, you need to add the header.
The header in HTTP is also in text mode.
First, the name of the header is indicated, the header is
host.
Then the two points are passed and after that the value is
assigned.ru.
The domain name of the server to which we want to
address is indicated here as an example of the domain name
of the server.
But the message is not necessarily indicated in the request.
In addition to the HTTP method, you can use other methods.
The web server, depending on the method in the request of the
HTTP it received, will perform different actions.
The method get means that the client asks for a web
server page.
Not necessarily a web page, it can be some other
resource.
The method post means that the client sends some data
to the web server.
The method head not only asks for the entire page, but only
its header.
The method put is used to place the page on the web
server.
The method delete to delete the web server page.
The method options asks for a list of all the supported
methods that can serve the interesting web server.
In addition to those methods that are listed here, there
are also other HTTP methods.
It should be noted that in practice, the method get is most
often used.
The request is in the web page or other resource and the post
is the transfer of data to the web server.
The HTTP response, which the server sends to the client,
also consists of three parts.
The response status, header, which are not necessarily
and the message body.
The response status says how the request was performed.
200 UK request was successfully performed.
Headings in the same format as in the request - the name
header - content type, type, transmitted data, type content,
meaning, HTML text, HTML text, UTF-8 coding and the length
of the message.
After that, the message body is transmitted to the request
of the HTML page.
What can be the statuses of the HTTP response?
Status is a three-digit number, the statuses are grouped into
five groups and the group is divided by the first figure
in the number.
The statuses that begin to be united are information
statuses, statuses that begin to be divided by the second figure
say about successful request execution.
For example, the status of 200 UK statuses that begin
to be divided by the third figure say about the transfer.
For example, the 301 constant transfer says that the page
was transferred to another address and in response, it is indicated
the new address of the page 302 temporary transfer says
that the page was also moved, but not constantly, but temporary.
Statuses that begin at 4 say that the error occurred
on the client's page.
For example, 403 is forbidden, the client tries to contact
the resource for which there is no access.
404 is not found, the client is contacted by the page that
is not on the server.
Statuses that begin at 5 say about the error, but already
on the server side.
For example, 500 internal error of the server occurred
some problem in the work of the program supply of the web
server.
501 method is not implemented in the request, such a method
HTTP is used, which cannot be processed by the web server.
Well, there are also a large number of other statuses that
are divided into these 5 groups.
Let's look at a short example.
We will have a separate video in the course where we will send
requests to HTTP in text mode and get answers.
At the first stage, you need to connect to the port 80
to the web server.
For the course, I created a web server Network Surcourse.
Now most of the web servers and the Internet use the
protected HTTP protocol.
This network course works on the HTTP protocol and the
pages that are placed on it are quite simple.
They can be viewed even in text mode.
We connected to this network to the port 80 and after that
we send the usual lines.
The first line is a request, a method get.
We want to get a page.
After that, we specify the page slash.
This is the root of the server, just the root of the page.
And the protocol version HTTP 1.1.
If we use the HTTP 1.1 protocol version, we need to
use the host's password to which web server we
call.
This is the example of the HTTP response, the same usual
lines.
First, we have the answer.
The HTTP 1.1 protocol version is a status 200 OK.
The service is successfully processed.
Then there are three headlines.
The first headline is a server.
This is a web server, github.com.
I placed this server on github pages.
Type of the data transmitted, HTML text, UTF-8 coding and
content length 236.
After that, the empty lines are indicated and the web
page looks like this.
So, we looked at the HTTP protocol.
The protocol of the hypertext transfer.
This is a protocol that is often used in practice, the
foundation of the World Wide Web.
HTTP works in the request-answer mode.
The client transmits to the request server, in which
it shows what it wants to do.
There are several methods of HTTP.
Most often, the method GET is used to get a page and
post it, send some data to the server, for example,
the data that the user has taken to the form.
The server sends an answer, in which the status is indicated,
for example, 200 OK, the request is successfully processed and
the HTML page is transmitted.
We looked at how the protocol works version 1.1 in text
mode.
More complex versions use binary mode.
Why is it necessary?
The fact is that the modern web is more complex than the one
that Tim Berners-Lee invented.
Modern pages contain not one file with text, but
in addition to the web page itself, there are a lot of other
files, a picture, a video, a tablet or CSS, a code for
JavaScript.
In order to show one page, the client needs to load
all these files from the server.
In addition, often on the practice of web servers, instead of static
pages, programs are used, which generate such
dynamic pages.
In order to work better with such data, new versions of the
HTTP/2 protocol and HTTP version 3 allow you to load pages
that contain a large number of resources faster than the HTTP
protocol version 1.
We further in the course will consider how these protocols
work, but after we get acquainted with the work of
the Transport Levels, TCP and UDP.
Because to understand the productivity of the network, we need to
know how the protocols of the pre-coded level and the
transport level work.
And now the HTTP protocol is used not only for
hypertext transfer, but also for the challenge of the program
through the API - application-program-interface.
In the course we will consider how it is done.
And this lecture is over.
Thank you for watching.
Goodbye.